roadmap: add TiKV 2024 roadmap (#16924)
tikv/tikv: doc/roadmap-2024.md

# TiKV Roadmap (2024~2025)

- Last Updated: 2024-04-23

> This is a roadmap of TiKV project from engineering and architecture aspects. It expresses the intension of how we will improve this project to make TiKV fit more users' use cases in next 1 to 2 years. The roadmap includes several domains like latency and performance improvement, stability, observability, etc. Notice: all content list in the roadmap is our intension, we will try our best efforts to make it happen, but it doesn't mean we have a commitment for it, please don't rely on features/capabilities currently TiCDC doesn't have for your projects which have strick timeline requirement, even these features listed in the roadmap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a roadmap of TiKV project from engineering and architecture aspects. It expresses the intension of how we will improve this project to make TiKV fit more users' use cases in next 1 to 2 years. The roadmap includes several domains like latency and performance improvement, stability, observability, etc. Notice: all content list in the roadmap is our intension, we will try our best efforts to make it happen, but it doesn't mean we have a commitment for it, please don't rely on features/capabilities currently TiKV doesn't have for your projects which have strict timeline requirement, even these features listed in the roadmap.
```

## QoS: Stable and Predictable Latency

This domain aims to enhance TiKV to provide predictable single-digit millisecond latency under different scenarios like too many MVCC versions, disk IO temporarily jitter, high read QPS in a small data range, etc. 

> ### In-Memory Engine

Reviewer 2: would it make sense to add a comment about other uses for in-memory usage?

Author: We can add it later since we don't know what other scenario can benefit from in-memory engine now.

### Mitigate the Impact of Temporary Disk IO Jitter

IO latency is very critical to the QoS of TiKV, because TiKV highly depends on the persistence of raftlog and read data from disk(in case of data not in block-cache). If there is a disk IO jitter, the application may suffer from high latency of queries. As the total number of TiKV nodes increases for a TiKV cluster, the higher possibility the TiKV cluster will encouter disk IO jitter issues. We experienced more disk IO jitter issues in cloud disk like AWS EBS compare to local nvm-e disk. We will improve the capability of tolerating single Disk IO jitter issues in a cluster by introduce improvements like apply-before-persistent, mitigate-latency-amplification, etc.

### Low Read Latency of Hot Region

> The read queries evenly distributed in different data ranges is a ideally workload, it can make good use of all resources across different TiKV nodes. But in the real world, queries tend to skew to some small data ranges, like latest added/modified data has higher possibility to be retrieved, a specified category's data has higher read queries in some special time range, etc. We call these highly retrieved data ranges as hot regions. Hot regions tend to cause higher query latency since there might be some queries need to wait. A faster in-memory engine cache layer might have a great benefit in this hot region case since it will use less resource to serve a query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read queries being evenly distributed in different data ranges is an ideal workload, which can make good use of all resources across different TiKV nodes. But in the real world, queries tend to skew to some small data ranges, like latest added/modified data has higher possibility to be retrieved, a specified category's data has higher read queries in some special time range, etc. We call these highly retrieved data ranges as hot regions. Hot regions tend to cause higher query latency since there might be some queries need to wait. A faster in-memory engine cache layer might have a great benefit in this hot region case since it will use less resource to serve a query.
```

## Comprehensive Memory Management

### Component-level Memory Trace

Introduce better memory trace for different internal components like transaction module, read pool, raftstore, etc. In this way, we can monitor the memory usage of different components.

### Memory Quota Limit

TiKV has some soft limits for different components' memory usage like scheduler, raftstore, but there are still some components like coprocessor don't have memory quota limit. In the coprocessor, we use the amount of pending queries to throttle the resources usage of coprocessor, but this still can result in Out-Of-Memory(OOM) when there are too many "BIG" queries which retrieve a large amount of data.

> ## Powerful and Robust Storage Engine

Reviewer 2: May be add experimenting with using io_uring based https://github.com/bytedance/monoio to replace sync IO for raft engine.

Author: The trick part is that we already separate the writing raft-engine operations asynchronously from the main message handling procedure, how much extra benefit to make the write raft-engine asynchronous one more step?

Reviewer 2: cc @siddontang who suggested this. the reason is that writing to file is not fully asynchronous unless one uses uring. monoio is more or less a drop in replacement, so it should be possible to investigate this.

Reviewer 3: @afeinberg io_uring is just a research, depending on our bandwidth, we don't need to write it down in the roadmap.

### RocksDB Engine

> Newer version RocksDB introduced some promising features like "WAL compression support" and "async-io", we are going to upgrade TiKV's RocksDB to 8.10 version and leverage these powerful features.

Reviewer 4: Maybe also explore using async rocksdb API which integrates better with TiKV's read pool.

> Newer version RocksDB introduced some promising features like "WAL compression support" and "async-io", we are going to upgrade TiKV's RocksDB to 8.1 version and leverage these powerful features.

Reviewer 5: to 8.10

### Titan Engine

> Titan engine can reduce write amplification dramatically for large value sceanrios, but there are also some drawbacks of Titan engine like space amplification caused by lazy GC, range scan speed has regression in some cases. We will introduce "Punch Hole" feature into Titan to reduce the space amplification. We probably will introduce "Level-Merge" feature to gain better range scan performance for Titan engine.

Reviewer 5: We may also do some optimizations to improve the cache efficiency, like prioritize the caching of blob file meta block

## Observability & Diagnosability

> Improve TiKV's observability and diagnosability, make it easily locate issues that might impact the quality of TiKV service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Improve TiKV's observability and diagnosability, making it easy to locate issues that might impact the quality of TiKV service.
```

### Locate Hot Read/Write Data Range Easily

Heavy read and write queries distributed in some small data ranges is normal, how to easily locate which data range has extreme high workload and then resolve or mitigate the potential impact? Does TiKV built-in hot read/write balancing policy take works? We are going to provide better observability to answer these questions.

### Locate Latency Jitter Issues Easily

> Latency jitter may happen when there is disk IO jitter, network jitter, or other environmental or non-environmental causes. We are goning to improve the observability to easily locate the root cause of temporary latency jitter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Latency jitter may happen when there is disk IO jitter, network jitter, or other environmental or non-environmental causes. We are going to improve the observability to easily locate the root cause of temporary latency jitter.
```

# TiKV Roadmap (2024~2025)

- Author(s): [zhangjinpeng87](https://github.com/zhangjinpeng87)
- Last Updated: 2024-04-23

This is a roadmap of TiKV project from engineering and architecture aspects. It expresses the intension of how we will improve this project to make TiKV fit more users' use cases in next 1 to 2 years. The roadmap includes several domains like latency and performance improvement, stability, observability, etc. Notice: all content list in the roadmap is our intension, we will try our best efforts to make it happen, but it doesn't mean we have a commitment for it, please don't rely on features/capabilities currently TiCDC doesn't have for your projects which have strick timeline requirement, even these features listed in the roadmap.

> ## QoS: Single-Digit Millsecond Predictable Latency

Reviewer 6: We may need to add specific scenarios for the single-digit latency goal. 
And in my opinion, the actual latency does not matter here---the current tikv is good enough, but stable and predictable latency matters without being impacted by backend jobs or single tikv's failures.

Reviewer 7: Agree. Stable and predictable performance/latency is more reasonable.

Author: ok
